Granularity in time, space, and behavior:
Essays in empirical economics using open data
Ramazan Bora BSc (Electrical & Electronics Engineering) MA (Economics)
 
0000-0001-6558-1668
A thesis submitted for the degree of Doctor of Philosophy at
The University of Queensland in 2026
School of Economics
Abstract
This thesis focuses on granular open source data to study a range of empirical questions across three distinct dimensions: space, time, and behavior. It recognises that coarse and aggregated data can hide unique patterns that can help provide additional insights. Each chapter develops an empirical pipeline starting with a transformation of fragments of raw information from various sources into an econometrically tractable harmonious dataset using modern computational techniques. Finally, appropriate statistical frameworks are assigned to test the hypotheses raised within each dimension of the analysis.
The first chapter highlights granularity in space. Using Turkey’s 2012 Metropolitan Municipality Reform, the chapter focuses on the development consequences of centralization in local governance. The reform constitutes a centralization shock for the rural villages by introducing new metropolitan provinces to encompass entire provincial borders. It expands the territorial jurisdiction in existing metropolitan provinces to match provincial borders as opposed to the previous urban core model. The empirical pipeline reconstructs village level administrative boundary micro-polygons for thousands of rural villages and harmonises spatial data with VIIRS night lights, village level populations, and driving distances to administrative centers. Focusing on peripheral villages along the treated-untreated province border frontier and using a contiguous-border difference-in-differences design with border segment fixed effects, the analysis reveals that treated peripheral villages in new metropolitan provinces exhibit 11% higher night lights in the 10 years following the reform. Existing metropolitan provinces do not show similar changes, pointing to a dilution effect. On the other hand, rural periphery in metropolitan provinces of both types keep 10% more population than untreated neighbors during an overall trend of rural to urban migration.
The second chapter focuses on granularity in time. The chapter revisits earlier results in birthplace favoritism highlighting new generation high temporal and spatial resolution VIIRS lights instead of the legacy DMSP-OLS night lights which are limited in both granular dimensions. The exercise first replicates the original findings in a fully open source data framework. It also shows that birthplace favoritism extends to the modern night lights era using VIIRS data. Using the monthly resolution of the new night lights reveals new insights into transition and crisis dynamics. First, the analysis documents an event study showing that detected luminosity increases as soon as a new leader ascends to power and is sustained after departure. This result contrasts to the previous finding that suggests the opposite dynamic using DMSP-OLS. Moreover, a closer look into the monthly progression reveals a surge in favoritism that coincides with the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic. Further analysis reveals confounding with population density. Mitigations using high dimensional fixed effects that directly control for population density shocks and sample restrictions that focus on leader-producing regions attenuate the pandemic premium but a significant portion still remains.
i
The third chapter studies granularity in behavior. The chapter considers the association between Ramadan fasting and cognitive performance using data from casual online chess. The analysis constructs a move-level dataset comprising 16 million observations in 800,000 games from players in Muslim and non-Muslim majority countries identified by players’ country flags in chess.com. The analysis uses a difference-in-differences framework with player and period fixed effects and reveals that Ramadan exposure is associated with 1% fewer errors as benchmarked against the chess engine Stockfish. The chapter also reveals significantly faster speeds and increased nocturnal activity compared to the control group. Selection issues concerning intraday adjustment of games by players are also addressed and the effects remain after these measures. Heterogeneity analysis reveals that cognitive performance association with Ramadan exposure is driven by low-skill and low-experience players. In a low stakes environment with strategically complex decision making, findings support modern decision making theories that suggest visceral states may improve decision quality.
Taken together, these findings demonstrate that the granularity of data and the complementary empirical pipelines yield important additional insights into existing empirical conclusions.
ii
