Chapter 1: Introduction Opposition MPs repeatedly raised a spatial thought experiment during Turkey’s 2012 metropolitan municipality reform deliberations. After the expansion of the existing urban centered metropolitan municipality jurisdiction, a province such as Antalya will end up servicing a border of length 600km, and whether it is reasonable to expect good governance from a local governance model of this scale.1 This debate points to a fundamental concern in political economy; that while centralization can take advantage of scale economies, excessive expansion of borders might deteriorate local reach. Until recently, empirical economists lacked the tools to effectively evaluate the welfare effects of these policy experiments on this rural periphery, restricting the visibility of these areas to research on development. This invisibility problem is not unique to data resolution limitations in spatial analysis. Temporal coarseness hides dynamic patterns, whereas coarseness of cognitive data hides determinants of human behavior. Recent decades have seen a measurement revolution through proliferation of open records allowing economics research to move beyond coarse aggregates and look into . The unifying theme of this thesis across different segments of empirical query is the exploitation of granularity of open data across three distinct dimensions: space, time, and behavior. The approach is consistent across the chapters to overcome specific identification challenges. Whether it is creating digital village micropolygons as a basis to understand demographic and developmental patterns in rural settlements vis- a-vis local governance centralization, utilizing monthly satellite imagery to zoom into political favoritism, or attaching cognitive scores to millions of moves in chess, the approach remains consistent. This thesis understands that whenever we zoom further into data, we uncover new insights and alter our understanding of established scientific consensus across a wide range of human presence, in how institutions, policy makers, and individuals operate. It allows me to map state capacity to development, disentangle demographic structure from political favoritism, and reveal counterintuitive positive cognitive associations with hunger. Each chapter builds on a similar structure where I construct empirical pipelines in several stages. First, I connect open-source direct and auxiliary data fragments to potential empirical questions. Second, I synthesize these inputs into comprehensive data products, taking advantage of modern computational techniques to transform raw, unstructured fragments into econometrically tractable harmonious variables. Finally, I subject the corresponding analysis to a rigorous statistical stress test framework to withstand the scrutiny of the scientific method. Chapter 2 focuses on granularity in space, where I address the longstanding debate between 1See T¨ urkiye B¨ uy ¨ uk Millet Meclisi (2012). 1 development and administrative centralization. Fiscal federalism argues that decentralized decision- making should be prioritized due to responsiveness to local preferences; a competing literature argues that in developing contexts, centralization may help take advantage of scale economies and state capacity. It has been historically difficult to test these theories due to data challenges, in particular with respect to rural settlements as well as the role of decision-maker incentives in boundary recomposition. I address these challenges using Turkey’s 2012 Metropolitan Municipality Reform, which constituted a significant centralization shock for thousands of villages by absorbing them into jurisdictions run by centralized municipalities based on historical provincial boundaries and preexisting provincial thresholds. To study these rural settlements, I reconstruct administrative boundary maps, combining them with VIIRS night lights as well as derived state capacity proxies and distances to administrative centers. My empirical framework compares treated rural villages along the boundary segments to their neighbors in control provinces in a contiguous-border difference-in-differences design. My main results present several patterns and nuances. I observe, within 10 years of reform im- plementation, a sustained 11% higher night lights in new metropolitan provinces compared to their neighbors in control provinces. A similar effect is not observed for existing metropolitan governments whose jurisdictions expanded drastically, suggesting a dilution effect in local governance. Moreover, treated villages retain 10% more of their population in the following decade regardless of dilution. Pop- ulation retention divergence is immediate, before any sustained quality of life improvement, pointing to an expectation channel. A particularly interesting feature pertains to distance to administrative centers. I document that peripheral villages further away from administrative centers radiate meaningfully reduced night lights and population retention; this divergence reverts to baseline for night lights and slows the population deterioration towards the end of my sample in 2024. These findings suggest a distance penalty due to centralization, but also an apparent staggered rollout of investments. My power outage proxy based on daily VIIRS data proves noisy, but suggests a probable channel via improved coordination of service delivery. On a methodological level, I present a potential shortcoming of outlier removal procedures in remote sensing with respect to temporal resolution; coarse aggregation can erase development signals that are captured in higher granularity, as sporadic signals may not survive outlier removal designed to stabilize longer horizons. This chapter connects to the theme of the thesis and advances scientific knowledge in several ways. The high-fidelity granular spatial data forms the basic building block of a data pipeline that meets high spatial and temporal resolution remote sensing data in VIIRS lights in various ways, as well as incorporated public population information and calculated Google Matrix API driving distances to administrative centers to investigate determinants of rural development. Along with the results enumerated above, I provide new insights that exploit granularity higher than traditionally used. In particular, my population results in rural villages remain in stark contrast to some of the findings of a recent working paper by Akgunduz et al. (2023) discussing the role of the 2012 Turkish reform on 2 firm loans and employment. Specifically, the authors do not find population differences based on their province-level analysis. I overturn this result in the context of rural settlement thanks to the additional granularity afforded by village-level polygons, as an average Turkish province contains approximately 400 villages. In this context, granularity recovered statistical neglect of the development signals for the peripheral rural communities that is also neglected by urban expansion. In a similar vein, my focus on the higher temporal frequency of monthly VIIRS data helps recover potential development signals. Chapter 3 shifts the focus to granularity in time. I revisit previous work which highlights political favoritism in the context of national leaders prioritizing their birthplaces. In particular, building on Hodler and Raschky (2014) (H&R hereafter), who use legacy DMSP-OLS night lights and proprietary leader and administrative boundary information, I replicate original findings in an entirely open-source framework, extend temporal coverage to the modern high-resolution VIIRS night lights era, and exploit monthly temporal resolution to further insights regarding dynamics around leadership changes and crisis periods. The replication and temporal extension relies on H&R’s framework, and later I build a rigorous event study framework around leadership transitions and use a comprehensive set of falsification exercises to stress test and guide crisis period analysis. My analysis points to broad replicability of H&R’s main framework with open-source data. Moreover, the results extend into the modern night lights era under a broad range of robustness checks, showing that birthplace favoritism remains a persistent feature of global politics. Analysis of leadership transition dynamics in the event study framework provides a departure from earlier findings. I document an immediate increase in luminosity around leader ascension and sustained luminosity after the leader ceases to be in power. Finally, I analyze how birthplace favoritism evolves over time, where I discover a temporal correlation of improvement in birthplace favoritism with the onset of the COVID- 19 pandemic which carries on until the pandemic subsides. My placebo exercises show that a similar temporal signature occurs when correlations are built on population density, suggesting confounding of birthplace favoritism and population density effects. I employ two independent approaches: one builds on a high-order fixed effects approach that controls for population-related shocks explicitly, and the other focuses on a more comparable sample of leader-producing regions. The COVID premium to birthplace favoritism survives both approaches individually and in conjunction with each other. Crucially, however, this effect disappears in established democracies. The analysis and results in this chapter, which has been featured in the UQ Discussion Paper Series, connects the broad theme of open-source data granularity to the literature in several dimensions. First, it contributes to the line of empirical distributive politics that resolves the variable alignment problem across countries (Golden and Min, 2013) by leveraging open-source high-resolution night lights, granular subnational digital maps, and global scale population rasters. Second, it reinforces the scientific tradition through extended replication, addressing the field’s growing emphasis on reproducibility by validating earlier proprietary-data findings with open-source alternatives. Crucially, 3 it exploits the temporal granularity of the VIIRS datasets to overturn null findings regarding leader transition dynamics and to detect pandemic-era anomalies in luminosity. Furthermore, high spatial resolution population density maps allow us to devise novel identification strategies within the context of political favoritism. Chapter 4 studies granularity in human behavior. Recognizing online chess, and Chess.com in particular, as a natural laboratory for testing cognitive hypotheses at scale, this chapter examines the association between Ramadan fasting and cognitive capacity in complex strategic settings. I parse move-level histories from 800,000 games, converting raw text logs into a panel of cognitive and behavioral metrics spanning 16 million individual moves. Critically, I employ the Stockfish chess engine to benchmark performance, creating a consistent metric of cognition within and across individuals and time. Moreover, individuals are assigned to Ramadan exposure status based on geolocation and self-identified platform flags. Using a difference-in-differences design with player and period fixed effects, I uncover associations between Ramadan exposure and three key outcomes: cognitive performance (measured as deviations from the engine optimal benchmark), move speed, and the within-day reallocation of play time. Contrary to the resource depletion hypothesis, I observe a positive impact of Ramadan exposure on move quality: players in Muslim-majority countries make approximately 1% fewer errors during Ramadan relative to the baseline. The findings present a commensurate decline in losses, and suggest a strong negative association between move times and Ramadan exposure. I further investigate intraday patterns with respect to these outcomes. Two findings emerge with clarity. Relative nocturnal activity in the Ramadan-exposed population increases substantially, and faster moves are concentrated during the late afternoon-early evening hours, when resource depletion peaks before breaking fast. I acknowledge that voluntary participation in casual online chess suggests a descriptive set of results rather than a causality argument. The highly visible changes in hourly patterns with respect to how players exposed to Ramadan reallocate their intraday behavior intensify this concern. To this end, I devise additional checks to mitigate these concerns. One particular strategy is to focus on subsamples of players who have stable nocturnal activity and those who don’t. This exercise supports the original cognition finding as I show that cognitive gains are mainly driven by players whose nocturnal activity remains stable. Examining heterogeneity, I also document a skill-related association between Ramadan exposure and cognitive performance. The reduction in errors is mostly due to lower-rated players as well as players less experienced on the platform. This study aligns with the overall theme of this thesis by creating a granular dataset on cognition using easily accessible modern computing technologies that exploit the abundance of open chess data. Aside from providing an alternative to behaviorally and temporally coarse experimental and survey methods to study cognition, this approach allows me to suggest potential perspectives on recent economics research on religious fasting. First, a complementary paper by Smerdon and Buckland 4 (2025) considers a similar setup where they analyze a parallel question for elite chess players in over-the-board and online tournament play. They find null effects and note that these effects are precise. My heterogeneity result suggests a potential explanation for why these changes are detectable for casual players and not elite players. In particular, while incentives to reorganize temporal playing distribution are stronger among casual players, my setup provides a breadth of skill differences across players. Smerdon and Buckland (2025)’s result is consistent with previous research showing null effects in studies of professionals such as athletes. In other words, substantially lower skill and lower stakes might intensify measurable behavioral changes compared to high-incentive settings. Another complementary result I provide regards the distribution of move times across the intraday axis. A recent paper by Gulek (2024) observes a higher incidence of traffic accidents during Ramadan evening rush hours. My finding for faster moves agrees with the resource depletion channel, specifically highlighting limited attention as the toll of fasting on the body strengthens, an observation made possible by the ability to analyze high-resolution move-level data. In summary, this thesis exploits granularity to relax aggregation constraints in three empirically relevant directions. Chapter 2 studies rural development and local governance centralization building on granularity in space. I next provide a political economy angle focusing on temporal granularity in Chapter 3. Chapter 4 explores how a sustained physiological constraint maps into decision making by using granular markers of behavior. Chapter 5 concludes.